Next let's look at the shared pointer the shared pointer is a smart pointer that provides a shared ownership
model of the heap object.
So like a unique pointer a shared pointer points to an object on the heap.
However unlike a unique pointer that heap object may be shared among many shared pointers.
So we can have one heap object referenced by multiple shared pointers that manage it unlike unique pointers
shared pointers can be copied and assigned.
This is exactly how we make them access the same he objects for efficiency shared pointers also support
move semantics while unique pointers can be used to allocate arrays of objects on the heap shared pointers
do not support this by default.
So you might be thinking we can have multiple shared pointers all referencing the same heap object.
So how do we know when that object needs to be destroyed.
And that's a great question.
There are different ways it does can be accomplished.
The most common technique is to use reference counting.
The idea is simple.
Every time we instantiate a shared pointer object and have it point or reference to the heap object
we increment to counter this counter simply has the number of shared pointers referencing that heap
object when the reference count becomes zero that we know nothing is referring to the heap object.
And it can be safely destroyed.
It's a pretty simple but effective model.
But it does introduce some overhead to the process.
However the overhead introduces in most cases not a big deal compared to the benefits provided by having
the system manage the shared objects for us.
Let's see how we can declare and used shared pointers.
First we'll see the same technique we used when we created unique pointers and then we'll see a more
efficient technique using the make shared function.
Here you can see that we're declaring P1 to be a shared pointer to an integer.
We're also initializing it to point to a new integer that we create on the heap and that integer has
been initialized to 100.
Now P one owns the object on the heap.
When one goes out of scope the INT on the heap will be deallocated.
That is unless other shared pointers are referencing it.
You don't need to call delete with a shared pointer.
Now as far as using the shared pointer the syntax is pretty much like a raw pointer or unique pointer.
You can see that if we dereference P. one we get the integer that it points to.
In this case 100 and we display it.
We can also modify the integer 1.2 in a similar manner.
In this case since we only have one shared pointer referencing the integer on the heap when P one goes
out of scope the integer will be deallocated from the heap before we see how we can create other shared
pointers and have them reference the same heap object.
Let's look at a very useful method in the shared pointer class called use count the use count method
returns the number of shared pointer objects that are currently referring to the heap optics.
In this example we'll have two shared pointers P1 and P2 that both reference the same heap object.
So first we declare P1 as a shared pointer that will manage in it to draw the heap and we initialize
at it to get to 100.
Now we call the use count method on P1 and we see that it displays 1.
That's what we expected since p 1 is the only shared point we're referencing the integer on the heap.
Now we create another shared pointer P2 and we use the copy constructor to initialize it so that it
refers to the same object as P1.
Now we call the use count on P1 and we display 2 since both P1 and P2 are now referencing that same
integer.
But notice that if we call use count on P2 we'll also see a two which makes perfect sense.
Now suppose that I call reset on P1.
Recall that with a unique pointer this destroyed the heap object and set the unique pointer to NULL.
However with shared pointers this decrements the use count by one and sets p one to know.
Now the use count for P1 is zero.
And the use count for P2 was 1.
So just because we reset p 1 does it mean that we deallocate the integer on the heap.
We can't.
In this case because P2 is still referring to it.
Finally when P2 goes out of scope the integer on the heap is deallocated since it's no longer being
referenced.
So you can see that reference counting is pretty simple in concept of course Sharepoint pointers also
allows to point to user defined types.
In this example we're creating a shared pointer that will point to an account object and we initialize
it to point to the Larry account.
We declare a count as the template argument and the shared pointer declaration.
What this says is that the shared pointer P1 will manage an account object on the heap and we're creating
that account object in the initializer list for P1 now we can use this pointer as we would a raw pointer
we can dereference it to get the account object as well as access the account object member methods
via the member selection or error operator.
And again when P one goes out of scope the heap storage associated with the account object is deallocated.
As you can see this code looks exactly the same as the code that we use with the unique pointer unlike
unique pointers shared pointers can be copied assigned and moved.
In this example we create a vector that will contain shared pointers to integers and we also create
PCR which is a shared pointer to an integer and it points to an integer on the heap which has been initialized
to 100.
We can now push back that shared pointer to the vector.
Remember we couldn't do this with a unique pointer since they don't allow copying but we can do it with
shared pointers.
Also notice that if we display the use count for pointer we'll see a 2.
This is because that integer on the heap is being referenced from pointer as well as from the shared
pointer in the vector.
Now when the vector and pointer both go out of scope we're sure that the last one referring to that
integer on the heap will clean it up.
There's no need to call delete or to figure out when and from where to call delete.
This is a huge deal.
It makes writing this kind of code so much easier and less error prone.
Now let's see a better way to initialize shared pointers.
The make unique function was introduced in plus 14 but to make shared function has been around since
C plus plus 11 to make shared function returns a shared pointer of the specified type and it allows
us to pass initialization values into the constructor for the managed object.
This is the preferred way to create shared pointers.
Not only do we not have to use the new keyword but the compiler will generate much more efficient code.
Since remember the compiler has to generate a data structure that holds information about the reference
count.
The raw pointer the actual heap object and other data as well.
So this creates all of this in one shot when the pointer is initialized.
In this example we create three shared pointers P1 P2 and P3 P1 is created using make shared and we
reference an integer on the heap and we initialize it to 100.
Now we can create P2 as a shared pointer to an int and use its copy constructor to initialize it to
p one p one and p to refer to the same integer on the heap and it's use count will be to the third pointer
P3 is initialized as empty so it doesn't point to any shared object yet but it is initialized.
It's no so there's no chance that we can have an uninitialized or a wild pointer when we use smart pointers.
Then we assign P to P3.
Now P1 also refers to the shared integer in our use count increases to three.
All three pointers.
Now go out of scope which shared pointers responsible for cleaning up the heap storage.
Well it's the last one that references it.
In this case it will be P1 since P2 and P3 will be destroyed before P1.
But the point is that you don't have to worry about it.
So now let's head over to the idea and we'll see some examples of using shared pointers in life code.
Ok so I'm back in the IDM in the section 17 workspace in the shared pointers project this project has
three sections.
The first section is all about using a shared pointer to an integer and sharing pointers so that we
can see these reference counts moving up and down.
The second section we're going to create test objects now and then the third section will use vectors.
So let's start with this section first and I want to walk through it with the debugger so you can actually
see what's going on.
So I'm going to debug this program.
OK so we're going to start right here on 931.
You can see what we're doing here we're creating P1 as a shared pointer to an integer and we're setting
that integer to 100.
Now if I step through that you can see the one over here I'll refresh and you can see that P1 has a
reference count of one you could see it right there I know it's kind of small but I couldn't make this
font any bigger on this window here.
So there is the counter of one.
So this tells you that P1 is pointing to that shared integer right and that's the only thing pointing
to that shared integer right now.
So on line 32 if I display to use count point for that shared pointer I am going to get one so I'll
execute that.
And you can see appear on the display they use count as one which is actually the same thing we're seeing
right in here.
OK so now on 9:34 we're doing is we're creating P2 in terms of P1.
So that's my copy constructor.
Now we're sharing ownership.
Remember this is one of the things that we could not do with unique pointers.
So in this case then we execute that line and you can see now that P1 and P2 are both referring to that
same storage.
So when I refresh here you'll see that they both have a reference count of two right there.
And so again P1 and P2 are managing that same area in memory.
They have co-ownership.
So at this point when I display the use count we'll see a two now in line 37 I'm resetting p 1.
What is that going to do.
Well it's going to set P 1 point nowhere.
So we're going to have that set to NULL pointer and Peter's reference count will go down by 1 because
now P2 is the only shared pointer that owns that memory.
So let's execute that line.
And let's refresh over here and you can see now that P1 is a null pointer basically and p to its reference
count went down to 1.
So if we display these last two statements we'll see that P ones use count to 0 and P2 is used count
is 1 and the program is complete now.
OK so now let's do part 2.
Ok so now let's execute the second section of this project.
You can see the second section starts here on line 41 f commented out the section one that we just ran.
So let me walk through this with the debugger so we can see what's going on again with these reference
counts.
OK so we're here on line 42 and we'll step through that.
All that's doing is creating PCR as a variable.
It's a shared pointer to a test object and we're using make shared this time to create that test object.
So I step through that and you can see that right now when I refresh my local variables PNTR has a reference
count of 1.
So we've got one reference to that shared test object on the heat.
Now we're going to call this function and we're going to pass TR into it.
This function expects a shared pointer to a test and it expects it by value.
So what we expect is for it to make a copy of that shared pointer.
Remember we're making a copy of the shared pointer object not of the test object on the heap that's
important to understand the difference there.
So let's walk through this.
Now we're in the function you can see we're right up here on line 23 at the top of the screen and right
now we've made a copy so if you look at p p as a shared pointer to that same test objects we expect
PS use count to be two because we just created a copy.
So let's take a look at that and you can see the use count is 2.
So now when P goes out of scope in this function what happens is that the reference count to get is
reduced.
So let's take a look at that.
Now we're back here right back to where we were we're online 44.
And if I refresh you can see that pizzicato now is back down to 1.
So we temporarily increase that reference count while we were in that function because we just made
a copy of something else that using that same resource.
So now we print out to use count for PCR which we expect to be 1 and that's exactly what this plays.
Now notice what happens I've created a block here and then there's another block here.
This just establishes scope so that we can see these inner shared pointers going in and out of scope.
So in this case we've got PTO are one and we're creating peach or one based on.
So now we've got Peter and Peter you are one both pointing to that shared resource.
So let me execute that line.
And what we expect now is the use COUNT TO BE 2 and I'll refresh here and you can see that the count
right there is two for both of them which is exactly what we expect it will display to.
Now right over here on the output what happens now is we create another block.
So we're creating P-T or two also referring to that same test object.
So now we've got these three pointers right.
These three shared pointer objects all referring to the same managed object on the heap.
So if I execute this line here on 9:49 what we have is we've got TTR Peachi are one or two all with
a reference count of three which is exactly what we expect.
And we can display that reference count.
You can see the three red here.
Now what we'll do is we'll reset pointer right.
So this pointer right here will be no doubt which means that that will become No.
And then the reference count for the other two pointers.
Peter you are one and Peter or two will go down to two.
Since Now there's one less shared pointer.
So let's execute that line and refresh and you can see that not Peachi is no Peter you are one and you
are to have a reference to this is we expect.
All right.
So now TTR is going to go out of scope right now and it just did.
So now we're going to print out the use count for P-T are in this case which will be zero.
Right because we reset it.
OK so now let's walk through this one more time and we're right here right now and let's step through
this one more time on this last statement.
And what's the use count for PCR.
Well let's refresh here.
You can see that Peter's use count is now zero right now.
Not referring to any managed object.
So that's it.
That's part 2.
We'll do next is part 3 where we'll create a couple of shared pointer which will create three shared
pointers to account objects and then we'll put them on a vector and print out the vector.
OK so let's wrap up this video by going over the third section of the Sharepoint project.
In this case you can see we're starting on line 58 and what we're doing is we're creating 3 account
pointers and these are shared pointers to account objects.
We're using the same account framework that we've been using all along.
This is the one that's using dynamic polymorphism.
So we're coming at this with a base class pointer right here and we're using stood make shared here
we're creating a trust account Larry.
We're creating a checking account.
So we're creating a savings account Kerley.
So there you go.
At this point we've created three objects then what we'll do is we'll take those three shared pointers
and we'll put them in a vector.
So notice this vector declaration here.
A vector is a vector of shared pointers to account objects move it accounts and will simply push back.
A.S.C. one two and three.
Remember we're not pushing a count objects we're pushing shared pointer objects that point to account
objects and then which is loop through that vector and display them.
OK so let's step through the debugger with this example and see exactly what's happening.
OK so here we are we're on 959 but we want to do is we want to create those three shared pointers.
So let's do that we'll step through the first one.
The second one and the third one refresh my screen here and you can see that account 1 is a shared pointer
with the reference count of one account two is the same and count three is the same.
So each one of them is pointing to its own managed object right in one case it's a trust account a checking
account and a savings account.
Now what we're going to do is we're going to instantiate that vector of shared pointers to accounts
and we'll do that right now step through that one line right now.
And there it is.
There's nothing in there right now.
Now what we want to do is we want to add those three shared pointers to the vector.
Remember A.S.C. 1 2 and 3 are shared pointers.
They're not accounts they're not raw pointers they're shared pointers to accounts.
So our vector holds shared pointers to accounts that's how we declared it.
So what's interesting here is remember these guys right now all A.S.C. one two and three all have a
reference count of 1.
But when we add them to the vector the vector is going to make a copy.
So now we have shared ownership A.S.C. one shares the ownership with that trust account with accounts
which has a vector that has a copy of that.
OK.
So let's walk through this step three times through this code here and we've just added all three accounts
refresh and you can see the actual accounts right here.
You can see that it's got three entries and notice the reference count for them too.
If I look at A.S.C. 1 2 and 3 you can see they also have a reference count of two because we made copies.
So now we've got shared ownership again.
A.S.C. 1 2 and 3 have shared ownership to that trust account checking and savings account and so does
the vector.
Now let's loop through this and display them.
So what we're going to do is we're going to use a range base for loop here and we're going to iterate
over the accounts object which is that vector.
And we're just using Konst auto here.
But remember the vector is a vector of shirred pointers.
So this A.S.C. variable is going to be a shared pointer.
And if we want to display the account would just dereference the pointer to get to the account.
So we expect this to print out the trust to have the checking account and a savings account and the
use count as we go.
Now the use count should be 2.
We we're using a reference to a base class.
So the dynamic polymorphism will be just fine.
So let's walk through this and you'll see that we've got right here you can see a peer trust account
Larry and display the reference count for that which we expect to be to right because a CC one is managing
it as well as the vector then we'll executed again we'll see the second object is that checking account
use count as is also 2 and then the last one is the savings account for Kerley and the used count is
2.
Now what happens when the vector goes out of scope what happens when these pointers go out of scope
while the vector is going to go out of scope first.
So it's going to be destroyed but the objects that the trustee account checking account savings account
objects on the heap won't be destroyed yet.
What will happen is that those shared pointers in the vector will be destroyed and then the reference
counts for those three options will go down by one.
Then when A.S.C. three two and one are destroyed that's when the heap storage will be dynamically allocated
and that's it.
That's the program it's done.
You can walk through this and use the debugger you can see the big difference here between using unique
pointers and shared pointers.
When we had a vector of unique pointers that vector exclusively owned those resources here were sharing
those resources and the use cases are different.
Obviously it all depends on what you're trying to accomplish.